---
layout: post
title: "Adaptative procedural for computing eigenvalues"
description: "Discussion of the implementation of different approaches of error adaptivity methods for solving elliptic eigenvalue problems."
comments: false
keywords: "eigenvaluse, finite, elements, adaptivity"
---

# Defining a goal

The goal of this incipient research is to be able to compute the eigenvalues (specifically, the imaginary part) of the Helmholtz equation
\\[ \Delta u +k^2 n^2 u = \beta^2 u. \\]
for \\( k \\) a given wavenumber.
Notice that, for the *exact solution* and *any domain* \\(\omega \subset \Omega \\), the following holds
\\[ \Im(\beta^2) = \frac{1}{2\imath \lVert u\rVert_\omega^2} \int_{\partial \omega} (\partial_n \overline{u})u - (\partial_n u)\overline{u} \, \mathrm{d}s, \\]
where this expression is obtained by means of testing the previous equation against the conjugate of \\( u \\), conjugating the equation and testing it against the solution, and taking diferences.

Thus, we define the functional
\\[ j_\omega(u) := \frac{1}{2\imath  \lVert u\rVert_\omega^2} \int_{\partial \omega} (\partial_n \overline{u})u - (\partial_n u)\overline{u} \, \mathrm{d}s, \\]
for all subdomains \\( \omega \subset \Omega \\).
In particular, we set \\( J(u) := j_\Omega(u) \\).

## Local estimators?

Consider \\( \Omega_h \\) a triangulation of \\( \Omega \\).
Notice we could rewrite \\( J(u) \\) as
\\[ J(u) = \sum_{ T\in \Omega_h } \kappa_T j_T(u), \\]
for appropiated weights \\(\kappa_T =  \frac{\lVert u \rVert_T^2}{\lVert u \rVert_\Omega^2} \\).

## Potential problems 

Despite the theory, seems hard to believe these functionals could work as their derivation holds for the *exact solution*.
Might be worth to analize the weak formulation and the functional setting.
A restriction operator \\(r_\omega: H^1(\Omega) \to H^1(\omega) \\) could play a role in this context.
On the other hand, a global phenomenon seems unlikely to be described by a local behavior.
We might want to experiment and analize the behaviour of the computed values.

## Error control for elliptic problems

There is a general framework for [optimal control to *a posteriori* error estimations in FEM](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0962492901000010a) by Rannacher and Becker, and further work in [elliptic eigenvalue problems](https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1014291224961) by Rannacher and Heuveline that suggesting how to proceed.

## Setting of the problem 

Let \\(\mathcal{a}(\cdot,\cdot)\\) the bilinear form associated to the weak formulation of the Helmholtz operator.
We want to find a pair \\((v,\lambda) \in H \times \mathbb{C} \\)  such that
\\[ a(v,\phi) = \lambda (v,\phi), \text{ for all } \phi \in H, \\]
where \\( (\cdot, \cdot) \\) is the standard \\(L^2\\) inner product, and \\( H \\) is an appropiate Hilbert space.
There is a natural counterpart of previous equation, that is given by the Galerkin finite element approximation of the previous equation (i.e., replace \\(H\\) with \\(H_h \subset H\\) ).
We can add a normalization constrain \\( \lVert v \rVert = 1 \\) to the above problem.

Define \\( V:= H\times \mathbb{C} \\) and \\( A: V \times V \to \mathbb{C} \\) given by 
\\[ A( (v,\lambda); (\psi,\chi) ) := -a(v,\psi) + \lambda(v,\psi)  + \overline{\chi} \left( \lVert v \rVert^2 -1 \right). \\]
Provided a functional \\( J: V \to \mathbb{R} \\), we want to compute a target value \\(J(v,\lambda)\\) subject to  \\(A((v,\lambda);(\psi, \chi))=0\\).

## Lagrangian!

We seek to characterize the stationary points of \\( L: V\times V \to \mathcal{C} \\) given by
\\[ L((v,\lambda);(\psi, \chi)) := J((v,\lambda)) - A((v,\lambda);(\psi, \chi)). \\]

This induces a second problem \\( DA((v,\lambda);(\Psi, \Chi), (\psi, \chi))= DJ( (v,\lambda);(\Psi, \Chi)) \\) for all \\( (\Psi, \Chi)\in V \\), that requires to be analized for this context. This problem is the *dual problem*. We need to ensure the solvability of this dual problem, thus we might need to analyze the structure of \\(J\\).

## Main result estimators

There is a big family of residuals that need to be considered.

### Global residuals

Consider, for simplicity \\( u := (v,\lambda) \\) and similarly for \(z \in V\). Then define 
\\[ \rho(u_h; \cdot) := F(\cdot) - A(u_h;\cdot), \\]
\\[ \rho^\star(z_h; \cdot) := DJ(u_h;\cdot) - DA(u_h;\cdot, z_h). \\]

This give us an error representation \\( J(u) - J(u_h) \approx \frac{1}{2} \rho(u_h;z-\psi_h) + \frac{1}{2} \rho^\star(z_h;u-\phi_h) \\).

### Local residuals

For practical purposes, we define local residuals. For this goal, consider \\(\mathcal{A}\\) to be the differential operator defined by the governing equation. Then,
\\[ \rho_T := \left( \lVert\mathcal{A}v_h - \lambda_h v_h \rVert_T^2 + \frac{1}{2}h_T^{-1}\lVert a[\partial_n v_h] \rVert_{\partial \Omega \setminus \partial T}^2 \right)^2, \\]
\\[ \rho^\star_T := \left( \lVert\mathcal{A}^\star v^\star_h - \lambda^\star_h v^\star_h \rVert_T^2 + \frac{1}{2}h_T^{-1}\lVert a[\partial_n v^\star_h] \rVert_{\partial \Omega \setminus \partial T}^2 \right)^2. \\]
These residuals are obtained after imposing the normalization constrains and breaking the global residuals into element-wise integrands.

For employing these estimates, we also require an interpolator \\( i_h: H \to H_h \\) verifying some interpolation inequalities.

### Estimators

Consider a *saturation assumption* (i.e., we are able to approximate the eigenvalue problem) given by
\\[ \Delta_h := \max\left( \lvert \lambda - \lambda_h \rvert, \lVert v - v_h \rVert, \lVert v^\star - v^\star_h \rVert\right) < 1. \\]
Then under a *specific* choice of *the goal functional* \\(J\\) we obtain
\\[ \lvert\lambda - \lambda_h\rvert \lesssim \sum_T h_T^2\left( \rho_T^2 + {\rho_T^{\star}}^2 \right). \\]

Nevertheless, there is a more important control for the convergence of the eigenvalues. 
\\[ \lvert\lambda - \lambda_h\rvert \leq \sum_T h_T^2\left( \rho_T w_T^{\star} + \rho_T^{\star} w_T \right). \\]

The quantities \\( w_T, w_T^\star\\) are bounded by the Hessians of the eigenvalue problems.
This means \\( w_T \lesssim \lVert \nabla^2 v \rVert \\) and  \\( w_T^\star \lesssim \lVert \nabla^2 v^\star \rVert \\).

Heuristically, it makes sense to replace these weights with \\( \tilde w_T := \lVert \nabla^2_h v_h \rVert_T \\) and \\( \tilde {w_T}^\star := \lVert \nabla_h^2 {v_h}^\star \rVert_T \\).

# Error-balancing stratergy

The main idea is to balance the error among the elements. 
Define 
\\[ \eta_T := h_T^2 \left( \rho_T \tilde w_T^\star + \rho_T^\star \tilde w_T \right). \\]
Then, as \\( \lvert J(v,\lambda) - J(v_h, \lambda_h)\rvert \approx \sum_T \eta_T\\), we mark/flag the elements \\(T\\) such that \\(\eta_T\\) does not meet certaing tolerance criteria. For example, we will refine the triangle \\(T\\) if 
\\[  \eta_T \geq \frac{\mathrm{TOL}}{ \lvert \mathbb{T}_h \rvert }. \\]
